Basic terminology of the abortion debate
\x91Roe v. Wade\x92 refers to the 1973 Supreme Court decision legalizing abortion.
\x91Right to Choose\x92 refers to a pro-choice stance, upholding Roe v. Wade.
\x91Right to Life\x92 refers to a pro-life stance, seeking to overturn or limit Roe v. Wade
Pro-life advocates refer to Roe v. Wade as an example of \x91Judicial Activism\x92 or \x91legislating from the bench\x92, i.e., that judges are making the law rather than interpreting it. In these terms, pro-life advocates believe in \x91Strict Constructionism\x92, or a literal interpretation of the Constitution with no implied rights.
A \x91Litmus test\x92 requires Vice Presidential & Supreme Court nominees to agree with one\x92s abortion view.
\x91The Human Life Amendment\x92 would be a Constitutional Amendment overturning Roe v. Wade. There is currently no such Amendment pending, but proponents regularly introduce \x91Human Life Bills\x92 in Congress.
States\x92 Rights: Most pro-life legislation aims at overturning Roe v. Wade, which means returning the decision about abortion to the states. In contrast, a Human Life Amendment to the Constitution would ban abortion in all states. Overturning Roe v. Wade would NOT ban abortion -- it would then become a state decision, with some states allowing abortion and some restricting or banning it.
Contraception
Contraception was the surprise issue of the 2012 election campaign. It became relevant because ObamaCare requires that employers provide health insurance for employees, including contraceptives. At issue is when the employer is a church or other organization morally opposed to contraception. Conservatives call this a \x91freedom of religion\x92 issue; liberals call it a \x91war on women.\x92
Burwell v. Hobby Lobby is a landmark Supreme Court decision, made on June 30 2014, allowing corporations to be exempt from providing contraception in their healthcare plan, if its owners religiously object, \tand there is a less restrictive means of furthering the law\'s interest. It is the first time that the court has recognized a for-profit corporation\'s claim of religious belief. The decision is an interpretation of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act.
Roe v. Wade
Planned Parenthood v. Casey
Fetal Viability
Abortion Legislation
\x91Partial-Birth Abortion\x92 refers to a late-term abortion method which induces a breech delivery and collapses the fetal skull before completing delivery. This procedure is banned in 24 states, but pro-choice advocates, including President Clinton, have sought to overturn state laws with a federal ruling. - In April 2000, the Supreme Court rejected a Nebraska law banning partial birth abortions. - In June 2000, the Court said that the Nebraska ban was unconstitutional because it had no exceptions and barred second trimester abortions.
Each state decides if \x91Parental Consent\x92 is required for teenagers seeking abortions. The Supreme Court ruled in 1992 that spousal consent cannot be required by the states.
Each state also determines rules about \x91informed consent\x92, about 24-hour waiting periods, and about when viability occurs after the 1st trimester.
In Nov. 2005, the Supreme Court heard the case \x91Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood,\x92 on the issue of parental consent (its first abortion case since 2000). They ruled in 2006 that states may require parental involvement, but not when it risks the health of the minor. No precedents were overturned nor set.
In April 2007, the Supreme Court upheld the ban, but allowed for future cases about how it is applied. \t
Stem Cell Research
\x91Stem Cells\x92 are undifferentiated cells, which are useful in research for cloning and for treating many diseases. Stem cells are best taken from human fetuses; hence the pro-life opposition. Many pro-life advocates support fetal stem cell research because of the medical potential. In 2001, Pres. Bush announced that the federal policy would be to allow fetal stem cell research on existing stem cell lines but not on new ones.
\x91Embryonic Stem Cells\x92 are stem cells derived from embryos, newborn\'s umbilical cords, etc. The 2008 election debate focuses entirely on embryonic stem cell research, because adult stem cell research (with source cells from non-embryonic sources) is no longer controversial.
Pro-life advocates generally oppose embryonic stem cell research because of its use of pre-born human source material. There are notable exceptions, however, such as Nancy Reagan and Sen. Orrin Hatch (R, UT) where otherwise pro-life people support embryonic stem cell research for its healthcare benefits.
As with the rest of the abortion debate, defining the playing field has become important in stem cell research. Defining stem cells as a healthcare issue is a pro-research stance. Defining stem cells as an issue about sanctity of life (e.g., as related to human cloning) is an anti-research stance.
Most relevantly to presidential elections, the terminology focuses on the term "embryonic". Anti-research advocates will usually say they are "pro-stem cell research," omitting the key term "embryonic" to avoid alienating victims of diseases that might be cured by embryonic research.pro-research advocates will often say they are "for ALL stem cell research," omitting the controversial term "embryonic" to avoid alienating pro-life voters.
Voters can discern candidates\' views on the issue by listening to how the candidate describes adult stem cell research.If the politician considers adult stem cell research just another form of stem cell research, morally equivalent to embryonic stem cell research, then they are pro-embryonic research. If the politician sings the praises of adult stem cell research, for example, specifyinh medical accomplishments that arose from ADULT stem cells, then they are anti-embryonic research.
In March 2009, Pres. Obama ended the ban on funding embryonic stem cell research. In signing the executive order, Obama said: \x93When it comes to stem cell research, rather than furthering discovery, our government has forced into what I believe is a false choice between sound science and moral values. In this case, I believe the two are not inconsistent.\x94
Related Legislation
\x91Clinic Access\x92 laws refer to what pro-life protesters may and may not do at the entrances to abortion clinics, and how far away they must stay. Clinic access became an issue after several abortion clinics were bombed and several abortion doctors were shot in recent years.
\x91RU-486\x92 is a drug that induces abortion in early pregnancy. In September 2000, after 12 years of study, the FDA approved the use of RU-486 until the 7th week of pregnancy.
\x91Cloning\x92 is a rapidly advancing technology in which a fetus develops from only one parent. It has been successful in animals, and is entering trial stages with humans. Pro-life advocates generally oppose cloning on the same basis that they oppose abortion. Buzzwords in the abortion debateDescribing abortion as a health issue or as a women\'s rights issue is a pro-choice stance.Describing abortion as a moral issue or as an issue of balancing the mother\'s rights with the fetus\' rights, is a pro-life stance. Both sides of the abortion debate attempt to define the playing-field in their favor by terminology. The pro-life name for pro-choice proponents is "pro-abortion", and the pro-choice name for pro=life proponents is "anti-choice". Using either of those charged terms defines the speaker as strongly one-sided (hence this website uses the more neutral terms "pro-life" and "pro-choice"). Any reference to "the rights of the unborn\x92 is a strong pro-life stance, as is defining life \x91from the moment of conception.\x92Any reference to \x91the rights of the mother\x92 is a strong pro-choice stance, as is defining a \x91right to privacy" (between a woman and her doctor).As mentioned above, the most obscure buzzword is that supporting \x91judicial activism\x92 implies a pro-choice stance, while supporting \x91strict constructionism\x92 implies a pro-life stance. In nominations for Supreme Court justices, asking this question is the archetypical \x91Litmus Test\x92 -- liberal Senators spent many hours questioning Clarence Thomas on whether he held a Strict Constructionist view of the Constitution (he did not admit so). For serious policy wonks, the most important abortion buzzword is \x91Stare Decisis\x92 -- that is the basis upon which Clarence Thomas declined to rule against Roe v. Wade. Thomas meant that although he would have ruled against Roe v. Wade in 1973, he would not do so now because the 1973 Supreme Court ruling had been in force for a quarter century and hence has precedential weight. Click here for Amazon books on Abortion.Pro life moral perspectivePro life medical/legal perspectivePro choice policy perspectivePro choice doctor\'s perspectivePro stem cell research policy perspectiveAnti stem cell research philosophical perspectivePro stem cell research legislative perspectiveOther candidates on Abortion:Background on other issues:    2020 Presidential Democratic Primary Candidates:State Rep.Stacey Abrams (D-GA)V.P.Joe Biden (D-DE)Mayor Mike Bloomberg (I-NYC)Mayor Pete Buttigieg (D-IN)Sen.Cory Booker (D-NJ)Secy.Julian Castro (D-TX)Rep.John Delaney (D-MD)Rep.Tulsi Gabbard (D-HI)Sen.Kamala Harris (D-CA)Sen.Amy Klobuchar (D-MN)Gov.Deval Patrick (D-MA)Sen.Bernie Sanders (I-VT)Adm.Joe Sestak (D-PA)CEO Tom Steyer (D-CA)Sen.Elizabeth Warren (D-MA)2020 GOP and Independent Candidates:CEO Don Blankenship (C-WV)Gov.Larry Hogan (R-MD)Gov.John Kasich (R-OH)V.P.Mike Pence (R-IN)Gov.Mark Sanford (R-SC)CEO Howard Schultz (I-WA)Pres.Donald Trump (R-NY)Gov.Jesse Ventura (I-MN)V.C.Arvin Vohra (L-MD)Rep.Joe Walsh (R-IL)Gov.Bill Weld (L-MA)2020 Withdrawn Candidates:Mayor Mike Bloomberg (I-NYC)Sen.Kirsten Gillibrand (D-NY)Gov.John Hickenlooper (D-CO)Gov.Jay Inslee (D-WA)Rep.Seth Moulton (D-MA)Rep.Beto O`Rourke (D-TX)Rep.Eric Swalwell (D-CA)    AbortionBudget/EconomyCivil RightsCorporationsCrimeDrugsEducationEnergy/OilEnvironmentFamiliesForeign PolicyFree TradeGovt. ReformGun ControlHealth CareHomeland_SecurityImmigrationJobsPrinciplesSocial SecurityTax ReformTechnologyWar & PeaceWelfare'
Buzzwords in the abortion debate
Describing abortion as a health issue or as a women\'s rights issue is a pro-choice stance.
Describing abortion as a moral issue or as an issue of balancing the mother\'s rights with the fetus\' rights, is a pro-life stance.
Both sides of the abortion debate attempt to define the playing-field in their favor by terminology. The pro-life name for pro-choice proponents is "pro-abortion", and the pro-choice name for pro=life proponents is "anti-choice". Using either of those charged terms defines the speaker as strongly one-sided (hence this website uses the more neutral terms "pro-life" and "pro-choice").
Any reference to "the rights of the unborn\x92 is a strong pro-life stance, as is defining life \x91from the moment of conception.\x92
Any reference to \x91the rights of the mother\x92 is a strong pro-choice stance, as is defining a \x91right to privacy" (between a woman and her doctor).
As mentioned above, the most obscure buzzword is that supporting \x91judicial activism\x92 implies a pro-choice stance, while supporting \x91strict constructionism\x92 implies a pro-life stance. In nominations for Supreme Court justices, asking this question is the archetypical \x91Litmus Test\x92 -- liberal Senators spent many hours questioning Clarence Thomas on whether he held a Strict Constructionist view of the Constitution (he did not admit so).
For serious policy wonks, the most important abortion buzzword is \x91Stare Decisis\x92 -- that is the basis upon which Clarence Thomas declined to rule against Roe v. Wade. Thomas meant that although he would have ruled against Roe v. Wade in 1973, he would not do so now because the 1973 Supreme Court ruling had been in force for a quarter century and hence has precedential weight.